some breaking news uh to bring you now
we have just had this statement from the
IDF uh about the investigation into the
killing of seven Aid workers uh in Gaza
in an Israeli air strike um the the uh
uh statement says that the
investigation's findings indicate that
the incident should not have occurred
those who approved the strike uh this
statement says were convinced that they
were targeting armed Hamas operatives
and not the employees of wck which is uh
World Central Kitchen the aid agency
they go on to say that the strike on the
aid Vehicles is a grave mistake stemming
from a serious failure due to a mistaken
identification errors in decision making
and an attack contrary to the standard
operating procedures they go on to say
that uh after being presented with and
considering the investigation's findings
the uh IDF chief of general staff
decided that the following command
measures will be taken um the Brigade
fire support Commander an officer with
the rank of major will be dismissed from
his position the Brigade Chief of Staff
an officer with the rank of Colonel in
reserve will be dismissed from his
position Additionally the Brigade
commander and the 162nd Division
Commander will be formally reprimanded
the IDF Chief of Staff decided to
formally reprimand the commander of the
Southern Comm command for his overall
responsibility uh for the incident uh
they go on to say that the IDF uh
emphasizes its commitment to fighting
against Hamas terrorist organization
while upholding the values of the IDF
the laws of war and avoiding harming
civilians uh the final sentence says the
IDF will learn the lessons of the
incident and will incorporate them into
the idf's ongoing operations um let's go
to our Middle East bureau chief Joe
floto Joe uh we have just had this
statement in as I was saying but um from
first reading this is extremely
significant particularly the um the the
Lessons Learned uh that line really
stands out to me the IDF will learn the
lessons of this incident what do you
make of
it well look the the IDF took a group of
journalists last night uh very late last
night to the ministry of Defense to give
them uh a briefing uh which was embargo
which was we weren't allowed to publish
until uh now uh to explain the context
in which this happened and and it's fair
to say that that uh that the soldiers at
that briefing were mortified uh they uh
recruited a a retired Major General to
have a look at the
facts uh and what comes across is uh as
you've pointed out already a series of
catastrophic errors I think one of the
biggest ones was that they failed to to
disseminate properly throughout the area
of operation that there was an aid
Convoy process happening that evening
there already been one Convoy that had
run earlier in the evening and uh they
had failed to notify everyone uh who was
F fighting in that area that this was
continuing so in that context they say
their soldiers were on the lookout for
Hamas gunman and had seen some of them
uh approach the aid Convoy earlier in
the uh in in the evening uh they showed
us some video of a gunman climbing on
one of the aid trucks a big lorry uh and
shooting in the air not clear what they
were shooting at whether it was a
warning shot they then described how
after depositing that truck full of Aid
that had been delivered to the coast uh
a number of vehicles separated in
different directions one vehicle headed
north uh and that was positively
identified and they showed us video of
gunman exiting that vehicle
in the meantime three vehicles belonging
to World Central Kitchen uh were driving
back down to the southern end of the
strip and at that point we're told that
their drone team identified a person
entering one of those Vehicles carrying
a gun turns out that was a mistake
turned out it was a
bag and the rdf pointed out that one of
the catastrophic mistakes was for that
team to seek authorization to
Fire based on what turned out to be very
flimsy evidence they weren't sure and
they shouldn't have asked for
authorization to fire the other shocking
thing I think was the detail last night
of how the individuals inside those
Vehicles survived the initial strike so
uh in the space of 6 minutes the Israeli
military uh fired three missiles at each
car but they're in sequence so they hit
one car where they suspected there was a
garment it wasn't they'd made a
catastrophic mistake two people are seen
leaving that vehicle apparently we
haven't been shown that footage entering
a second vehicle that was part of the
Convoy 2 minutes later that vehicle is
Struck from the air and there are
survivors from that second air strike
who enter the Third vehicle in that
Convoy and try to make their their way
away from the scene two minutes later
they are struck again by a missile and
at that point well we know the result
seven people ended up losing their lives
and we've heard from the families of
those victims we heard from them the the
the family of uh Jacob Flickinger
earlier
they there there has been speculation
that they were targeted directly but
that in this statement they are
absolutely conflicting that and they was
they are saying that this this is this
is a
mistake so one one of the things that is
clear from from the brief amount of
video that that we were shown last night
is that at night with the cameras that
they have on their drones uh the large
Colorful World Central Kitchen stickers
are not visible at least on the video
that we were shown uh and the Israeli
military wanted to stress that at no
point did their soldiers believe that
this was an aid Convoy they thought that
they were
gunmen however there are very simple
remedies uh to uh to be able to identify
vehicles uh at night from drones uh all
military vehicles have got special
reflective tape that could have been
used but most importantly there was no
way to contact the team on the ground so
the Israeli military said that once they
spotted a gunman earlier in the evening
they made an attempt to contact World
Central Kitchen contacted their
coordination Center which I understand
is in
Washington uh they were unable to reach
their people on the ground now we're
told by a agencies that this is frequent
event the phone system is obviously uh
deeply deeply dysfunctional uh satellite
phones don't work very well uh and we
are told by the aid agencies that the
IDF themselves prohibit the use of
radios so it was impossible to contact
them but the bigger context is that this
was an aid operation that was
effectively sponsored by the IDF these
shipments from Cyprus directly to
Northern Gaza had been something carried
out under the aaces of the IDF they were
providing security that evening and not
to have told everyone involved uh in
operations in that evening that there
were civilians in the
area uh appears to be one of the most
serious failings uh in this whole Affair
which is why the the the the commander
of Southern command so that's one of the
most senior jobs uh in the IDF has been
formally repr reprimanded by the chief
of staff in the statement they also say
we express our deep sorry for the loss
and send our condolences to the families
and the wck organization they say we
consider the vital humanitarian activity
of international Aid organizations to be
of utmost importance will continue to
work to coordinate and assist their
activities while ensuring their safety
and safeguarding their lives I mean we
know that those um that it looks like
those Crossings will will at some point
uh be opened but do you think this this
could could therefore have an impact on
those Aid organizations because you know
if they if they know that this could
happen that this is a mistake will they
put their staff at potential
risk so let the M Ministry of Defense
here say they're already taking steps to
improve the coordination uh of uh Aid
and to make it safer you've just pointed
out that there as a result of this
incident and uh what we understand was
was quite a difficult conversation with
the American president the Israeli Prime
Minister has announced the opening of
further Aid Crossings and and critically
the use of ashod Port which is just 45
minute driveway from northern Gaza to
deliver Aid uh into uh the war zone now
there are going to be questions about
Safety and Security I think there are
also questions about the level of
evidence the threshold above which the
IDF considers it appropriate to use
lethal Force when they only suspect that
someone might be a gunman so plenty of
people will look at this incident and
conclude that this scrutiny has happened
only because six international passport
holders were ultimately killed but lots
of people will W will wonder whether
that
laxity uh that speed uh possibly you
would justify as
recklessness uh in applying lethal Force
when it's not clear that a gunman was uh
in the vehicle
uh has something that's been applied in
the last 6 months countless times
possibly there is a great deal of
suspicion that the use of force is
applied recklessly and this will do
nothing to assuage people's suspicion of
that we also have a map um Joe I should
point out that the the map you're about
to see has been given us by uh the IDF
um and that Joe kind of takes us through
what happen can you just reiterate what
they are saying happened in this
situation yeah so let's it's it's a
complex story but let's go through it uh
so in the top right of that picture
you'll see the the improvised Jetty that
has been built over the last few weeks
to take uh Aid to Northern Gaza and it
it is uh there that a a ship with about
300 tons worth of food Aid has come from
Cypress and docked in Northern Gaza rdf
were providing security for that that
area and they were unloading that ship
that evening so a previous Convoy had
already departed earlier in the evening
without any event at all uh at about
10:00 that night they offload a further
100 tons onto a truck onto a big lorry
uh and that heads down the coast to a
point on that map I don't know if it's
still up called The wck Welcome Center
that's where they're met by the escort
of these Aid workers who consquently
lose their lives and that's where the
IDF say that a gunman boards the aid
Lorry and fires shots in the air we
don't know if that was locally agreed
security or whether it was a genuine
attempt by Hamas to hijack an aid Convoy
we don't know at this stage the people
who do are now dead but that truck with
its escort goes down the coast then
turns left Inland to a warehouse and is
deposited in that warehouse and at at
that point the Convoy splits one car
goes north which the IDF say and they've
shown us video contain four gunmen and
then three cars which we now know
contain seven members of the world
Central Kitchen staff uh heads back to
the coastal road which is the road that
takes them away from where the fighting
is uh in central Gaza and they're
heading home and it's at that point when
they leave that warehouse that we're
told that the Drone
crew uh
appears to see a gunman enter one of
those
vehicles with no evidence of that and
that we weren't shown any video of that
point in the decision making but it's
clear that they mistook a bag for a gun
and on the basis of mistaking a bag for
a gun they sought authorization for a
missile to be struck at that first
vehicle